feat: add open-source releases regulation (#605)
italia/eidas-it-wallet-docs: docs/en/open-source.rst

.. include:: ../common/common_definitions.rst

.. _open-source.rst:

Open Source Releases for IT-Wallet Solutions  
============================================

In compliance with the LLGG Wallet mandates, IT-Wallet Solution Providers, both public and private, are required to make their source code available. This requirement emphasizes the importance of using open-source software within public administrations to promote transparency and reduce costs. This requirement is supported by the Italian Digital Administration Code (CAD) articles 68 and 69, European regulations, and best practices in open-source software development. This document defines the specific requirements for different stakeholders involved in the IT-Wallet ecosystem, including Wallet Providers, Credential Issuers, and Relying Parties.

> 
> All the implementers, be these Wallet Providers, Credential Issuers or Relying Parties SHOULD follow industry best practices for open-source software, including proper documentation, version control, and community engagement. In particular:
> 
>     - **Transparency and Documentation**: Maintaining clear documentation and contribution guidelines.
>     - **Community Engagement**: Fostering active community involvement for development and support.
>     - **Version Control**: Using systems like Git for managing code changes.
>     - **Security Practices**: Implementing regular code audits and secure coding standards.
>     - **Licensing**: Choosing appropriate open-source licenses (e.g., EUPL, MIT, Apache 2.0, GPL, AGPL).

Author: ```suggestion

All the implementers, be these Wallet Providers, Credential Issuers or Relying Parties, owning the product code, SHOULD follow industry best practices for open-source software, including proper documentation, version control, and community engagement. In particular:

    - **Transparency and Documentation**: Open Source Project Owners SHOULD produce clear documentation and contribution guidelines.
    - **Community Engagement**: Open Source Project Owners SHOULD foster active community involvement for development and support.
    - **Version Control**: Open Source Project Owners MAY use systems like Git for managing code changes.
    - **Security Practices**: Open Source Project Owners MUST produce regular code audits and secure coding standards.
    - **Licensing**: Open Source Project Owners MUST use appropriate open-source licenses (e.g., EUPL, MIT, Apache 2.0, GPL, AGPL).
    - **Responsible Security Disclosure**: Open Source Project Owners MUST configure responsible security disclosure procedures to handle the security issues in an appropriate way, mitigating any kind of threat derived by an unresponsible security issue disclosure. 
```

.. include:: ../common/common_definitions.rst

.. _open-source.rst:

Open Source Releases for IT-Wallet Solutions  
============================================

> In compliance with the LLGG Wallet mandates, IT-Wallet Solution Providers, both public and private, are required to make their source code available. This requirement emphasizes the importance of using open-source software within public administrations to promote transparency and reduce costs. This requirement is supported by the Italian Digital Administration Code (CAD) articles 68 and 69, European regulations, and best practices in open-source software development. This document defines the specific requirements for different stakeholders involved in the IT-Wallet ecosystem, including Wallet Providers, Credential Issuers, and Relying Parties.

Author: ```suggestion
In compliance with the LLGG Wallet mandates, IT-Wallet Solution Providers, both public and private, are required to make their source code available. This requirement emphasizes the importance of using open-source software within public administrations to promote transparency and reduce costs. This requirement is supported by the Italian Digital Administration Code (CAD) articles 68 and 69, European regulations (``Artificial Intelligence Act (AI Act)`` <https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32024R1689>_, ``Cyber Resilience Act (CRA)`` <https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=OJ:L_202402847>_, ``Interoperable Europe Act`` <https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:52022PC0720>_), and best practices in open-source software development. This document defines the specific requirements for different stakeholders involved in the IT-Wallet ecosystem, including Wallet Providers, Credential Issuers, and Relying Parties.
```

> All the implementers, be these Wallet Providers, Credential Issuers or Relying Parties, owning the product code, SHOULD follow industry best practices for open-source software, including proper documentation, version control, and community engagement. In particular:

Author: ```suggestion
All the implementers, be these Wallet Providers, Credential Issuers or Relying Parties, owning the product code (from now on Open Source Project Owner) SHOULD follow industry best practices for open-source software, including proper documentation, version control, and community engagement. In particular:
```

> 

Author: I would define within only in this section the term "Open Source Project Owner"

    - **Transparency and Documentation**: Open Source Project Owners SHOULD produce clear documentation and contribution guidelines.
    - **Community Engagement**: Open Source Project Owners SHOULD foster active community involvement for development and support.
    - **Version Control**: Open Source Project Owners MAY use systems like Git for managing code changes.
    - **Security Practices**: Open Source Project Owners MUST produce regular code audits and secure coding standards.
    - **Licensing**: Open Source Project Owners MUST use appropriate open-source licenses (e.g., EUPL, MIT, Apache 2.0, GPL, AGPL).
    - **Responsible Security Disclosure**: Open Source Project Owners MUST configure responsible security disclosure procedures to handle the security issues in an appropriate way, mitigating any kind of threat derived by an unresponsible security issue disclosure. 

Wallet Provider Solutions 
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Wallet Solution Providers are mandatorily required to release their source code, facilitating transparency, security auditing within the IT-Wallet ecosystem. The release of source code should adhere to the following guidelines:

Author: ```suggestion
Wallet Solution Providers are mandatorily required to release their source code, facilitating transparency, security auditing within the IT-Wallet ecosystem. The release of source code adheres to the following guidelines:
```

> Wallet Solution Providers are mandatorily required to release their source code. This facilitate transparency, security auditing, and interoperability within the IT-Wallet ecosystem. The release of source code should adhere to the following guidelines:

Author: ```suggestion
Wallet Solution Providers are mandatorily required to release their source code, facilitating transparency, security auditing within the IT-Wallet ecosystem. The release of source code should adhere to the following guidelines:
```

> Wallet Solution Providers are mandatorily required to release their source code, facilitating transparency, security auditing within the IT-Wallet ecosystem. The release of source code adheres to the following guidelines:

Reviewer: Wallet Solution Providers are required 
```suggestion
Wallet Solution Providers are required to release their source code, facilitating transparency, security auditing within the IT-Wallet ecosystem. The release of source code adheres to the following guidelines:
```

Author: In most contexts, the word "required" is sufficient to convey the necessity of something.

> Wallet Solution Providers are mandatorily required to release their source code, facilitating transparency, security auditing within the IT-Wallet ecosystem. The release of source code adheres to the following guidelines:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Wallet Solution Providers are required to release their source code, build system, and all other assets required to the reproducibility of the implementation in order to facilitate transparency, security auditing within the IT-Wallet ecosystem. The release of source code adheres to the following guidelines:
```

> - **European Regulations**: According to Art ...... Providers MUST ensure their solutions comply with relevant European standards and regulations, fostering cross-border interoperability.

Author: ```suggestion
- **European Regulations**: According to the Consolidated Regulation (EU) 2024/2979, Art 5a item 3, `the source code of the application software components of European Digital Identity Wallets shall be open-source licensed. Member States may provide that, for duly justified reasons, the source code of specific components other than those installed on user devices shall not be disclosed`.
```

> - **European Regulations**: According to Art ...... Providers MUST ensure their solutions comply with relevant European standards and regulations, fostering cross-border interoperability.

Author: @gmessori18 please provide the normative requirement evidences here

Author: @gaecapdtd ^

Reviewer 3: @gmessori18 please check last comment

Credential Issuers Solutions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Credential Issuers are required to release their source code only if they are providers for public administrations or if their solutions are listed in the public administration reuse catalog. The requirements include:

Author: ```suggestion
Credential Issuers are required to release their source code if they are providers for public administrations or if they are public administrations themselves. The requirements include:
```

> Credential Issuers are required to release their source code if they are providers for public administrations or if they are public administrations themselves. The requirements include:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Credential Issuers are recommended to release their source code if they are providers for public administrations or if they are public administrations themselves. The requirements include:
```

Reviewer 2: il CAD art. 69 richiede, non raccomanda

Reviewer: Corretto, ma le LLGG lo richiedono solo per i Wallet Provider, questa proposta va in quella direzione.

Author: per ereditartietà vediamo i regolamenti europei IA, interop, CRA (ci sarebbe anche la strategia 2020-2023 think different europea), poi il CAD eppoi le LLGG Wallet

in ambito wallet il must è per i wallet provider, per tutti gli altri applichiamo le norme di livello superiore e le buone pratiche

> - **Public Administration Engagement**: Issuers working with public administrations MUST ensure their solutions are open-source to facilitate integration and reuse.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Public Administration Engagement**: Issuers working with public administrations MUST ensure their solutions are released with an open source license, in the way specified by the CAD art. 69 (and related guidelines).
```

> - **Catalog of Reuse**: Solutions listed in the public administration reuse catalog MUST be open-source to promote widespread adoption and adaptation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Catalog of Reuse**: Solutions created with or for public administration MUST be submitted to the public administration reuse catalog to promote widespread adoption and adaptation.
```

Relying Parties Solutions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Relying Parties are subject to the same conditions as Credential Issuers regarding the release of their source code. They MUST comply if they are involved with public administrations or listed in the reuse catalog.

Author: ```suggestion
Relying Parties are subject to the same conditions as Credential Issuers regarding the release of their source code.
```

> Relying Parties are subject to the same conditions as Credential Issuers regarding the release of their source code.

Author: ```suggestion
Relying Parties are subject to the same conditions as Credential Issuers regarding the release of their source code.

Responsible Disclosure
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In the European context, the Cyber Resilience Act (CRA) mandates procedures for handling vulnerability reports and requires reporting actively exploited vulnerabilities to Computer Security Incident Response Teams (CSIRTs). The Directive on Security of Network and Information Systems Directive (EU) 2022/2555 (NIS2 <https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:32022L2555>_) also emphasizes vulnerability handling within cybersecurity risk management. Many member states have national responsible disclosure policies.

ISO/IEC 29147:2018 (<https://www.iso.org/standard/72311.html>_) provides guidelines for vulnerability disclosure processes. Industry best practices, often seen in bug bounty platforms, clear reporting, response times, safe harbor, and coordinated disclosure.

Security Best Practices for Releasing Source Code of Critical Components
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The EU Open Source Software Strategy encourages open sourcing with an implicit need for security. The CRA's focus on security by design and Software Bill of Materials (SBOMs <https://www.cisa.gov/sbom>_) requires secure development practices relevant to open source releases.

The Open Worldwide Application Security Project (OWASP <https://owasp.org/>_) provides extensive secure coding guidelines and security patterns. The  SysAdmin, Audit, Network, and Security Institute (SANS <https://www.sans.org/>_) and the Italian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT <https://cert-agid.gov.it/>_) offer secure coding standards for various languages. Version control best practices include regular commits, detailed messages, code reviews, branch protection, and careful secret management. Employing static and dynamic code analysis, along with threat modeling, is crucial before release. Robust dependency management involves SBOMs, regular updates, vulnerability scanning, and version pinning. Secure build and release processes ensure software integrity. For open-source projects, engaging with the community and maintaining transparency about security practices are RECOMMENDED.
```

Credential Issuers
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Credential Issuers are encouraged to release their source code under an open-source license, starting from the experimentation phase.

Relying Parties
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Relying Parties are are encouraged to follow the same conditions as Credential Issuers regarding the release of their source code.

Responsible Disclosure
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In the European context, the Cyber Resilience Act (CRA) mandates procedures for handling vulnerability reports and requires reporting actively exploited vulnerabilities to Computer Security Incident Response Teams (CSIRTs). The Directive on Security of Network and Information Systems Directive (EU) 2022/2555 (NIS2 <https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:32022L2555>_) also emphasizes vulnerability handling within cybersecurity risk management.

> ISO/IEC 29147:2018 (<https://www.iso.org/standard/72311.html>_) provides guidelines for vulnerability disclosure processes. Industry best practices includes bug bounty platforms, clear reporting, response times, safe harbor, and coordinated disclosure.

Author: ```suggestion
```

Moved to an issue

Author: Moved here https://github.com/italia/eid-wallet-it-docs/issues/645

    - **Transparency and Documentation**: Open Source Project Owners SHOULD produce clear documentation and contribution guidelines.
    - **Community Engagement**: Open Source Project Owners SHOULD foster active community involvement for development and support.
    - **Software Version Control**: Open Source Project Owners SHOULD use version control systems, such as Git, for managing code changes.
    - **Security Practices**: Open Source Project Owners SHOULD produce regular code audits and secure coding standards.
    - **Licensing**: Open Source Project Owners MUST use appropriate open-source licenses, recognized as "free license" or "open source license" by the Free Software Foundation or the Open Source Initiative.
    - **Responsible Security Disclosure**: Open Source Project Owners SHOULD configure responsible security disclosure procedures to handle the security issues in an appropriate way, mitigating any kind of threat derived by an unresponsible security issue disclosure. 

Wallet Providers
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Wallet Solution Providers are encouraged to release their source code, build system, and all other assets required to the reproducibility of the implementation in order to facilitate transparency, security auditing within the IT-Wallet ecosystem. Where applicable, the release of source code SHOULD follow the specifications below:

Author: ```suggestion
Wallet Providers are encouraged to release their source code, build system, and all other assets required to the reproducibility of the implementation in order to facilitate transparency, security auditing within the IT-Wallet ecosystem. Where applicable, the release of source code SHOULD follow the specifications below:
```

Credential Issuers
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Credential Issuers are encouraged to release their source code under an open-source license, starting from the experimentation phase.

Relying Parties
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Relying Parties are are encouraged to follow the same conditions as Credential Issuers regarding the release of their source code.

Responsible Disclosure
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In the European context, the Cyber Resilience Act (CRA) mandates procedures for handling vulnerability reports and requires reporting actively exploited vulnerabilities to Computer Security Incident Response Teams (CSIRTs). The Directive on Security of Network and Information Systems Directive (EU) 2022/2555 (NIS2 <https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:32022L2555>_) also emphasizes vulnerability handling within cybersecurity risk management.

ISO/IEC 29147:2018 (<https://www.iso.org/standard/72311.html>_) provides guidelines for vulnerability disclosure processes. Industry best practices includes bug bounty platforms, clear reporting, response times, safe harbor, and coordinated disclosure.

> Security Best Practices for Releasing Source Code of Critical Components
> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
> 
> The EU Open Source Software Strategy encourages open sourcing with an implicit need for security. The CRA's focus on security by design and Software Bill of Materials (SBOMs <https://www.cisa.gov/sbom>_) requires secure development practices relevant to open source releases.
> 
> The Open Worldwide Application Security Project (OWASP <https://owasp.org/>_) provides extensive secure coding guidelines and security patterns. The  SysAdmin, Audit, Network, and Security Institute (SANS <https://www.sans.org/>_) and the Italian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT <https://cert-agid.gov.it/>_) offer secure coding standards for various languages. Version control best practices include regular commits, detailed messages, code reviews, branch protection, and careful secret management. Employing static and dynamic code analysis, along with threat modeling, is required before release. Robust dependency management involves SBOMs, regular updates, vulnerability scanning, and version pinning. Secure build and release processes ensure software integrity. For open-source projects, engaging with the community and maintaining transparency about security practices are RECOMMENDED.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

```

Reviewer 4: As suggested by @peppelinux this section is removed from the current release for future development.

.. include:: ../common/common_definitions.rst

.. _open-source.rst:

Open Source Releases for IT-Wallet Solutions  
============================================

> In compliance with the LLGG Wallet mandates, IT-Wallet Solution Providers, both public and private, are required to make their source code available. This requirement emphasizes the importance of using open-source software within public administrations to promote transparency and reduce costs. This requirement is supported by the Italian Digital Administration Code (CAD) articles 68 and 69 (and related guidelines), European regulations (``Artificial Intelligence Act (AI Act)`` <https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32024R1689>_, ``Cyber Resilience Act (CRA)`` <https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=OJ:L_202402847>_, ``Interoperable Europe Act`` <https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:52022PC0720>_), and best practices in open-source software development. This document defines the specific requirements for different stakeholders involved in the IT-Wallet ecosystem, including Wallet Providers, Credential Issuers, and Relying Parties.

Author: ```suggestion
IT-Wallet Solution Providers, both public and private, are enabled to make their source code available. In particular, public administrations using and producing open-source software promote transparency and reduce costs. Open source is supported by the Italian Digital Administration Code (CAD) articles 68 and 69 (and related guidelines), European regulations (`Artificial Intelligence Act (AI Act) <https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32024R1689>`_, `Cyber Resilience Act (CRA) <https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=OJ:L_202402847>`_, `Interoperable Europe Act <https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:52022PC0720>`_), and best practices in open-source software development. This document defines the specific requirements for different stakeholders involved in the IT-Wallet ecosystem, including Wallet Providers, Credential Issuers, and Relying Parties.
```

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
In line with the general principles of openness and transparency, IT-Wallet Solution Providers are encouraged to consider making their source code available, particularly when adopting open-source approaches, including during the experimentation phase, to promote collaboration, peer review, and shared improvements across the ecosystem. This encouragement is part of an evolving framework, pending the definition of the relevant procedures by the Guidelines pursuant to Article 64-quater of the CAD, which refers to Article 69 regarding the release of source code. In particular, public administrations using and producing open-source software promote transparency and reduce costs. Open source is supported by the Italian Digital Administration Code (CAD) articles 68 and 69 (and related guidelines), European regulations (``Artificial Intelligence Act (AI Act)`` <https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32024R1689>_, ``Cyber Resilience Act (CRA)`` <https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=OJ:L_202402847>_, ``Interoperable Europe Act`` <https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:52022PC0720>_), as well as by best practices in open-source software development. This document defines the specific requirements for different stakeholders involved in the IT-Wallet ecosystem, including Wallet Providers, Credential Issuers, and Relying Parties.
```

> In line with the general principles of openness and transparency, IT-Wallet Solution Providers are encouraged to consider making their source code available, particularly when adopting open-source approaches, including during the experimentation phase, to promote collaboration, peer review, and shared improvements across the ecosystem. This encouragement is part of an evolving framework, pending the definition of the relevant procedures by the Guidelines pursuant to Article 64-quater of the CAD, which refers to Article 69 regarding the release of source code. In particular, public administrations using and producing open-source software promote transparency and reduce costs. Open source is supported by the Italian Digital Administration Code (CAD) articles 68 and 69 (and related guidelines), European regulations (``Artificial Intelligence Act (AI Act)`` <https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32024R1689>_, ``Cyber Resilience Act (CRA)`` <https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=OJ:L_202402847>_, ``Interoperable Europe Act`` <https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:52022PC0720>_), as well as by best practices in open-source software development. This document defines the specific requirements for different stakeholders involved in the IT-Wallet ecosystem, including Wallet Providers, Credential Issuers, and Relying Parties.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
In line with the general principles of openness and transparency, Wallet Providers, Credential Issuers and Relying Parties are encouraged to consider adopting open-source approaches, including during the experimentation phase, to promote collaboration, peer review, and shared improvements across the ecosystem. This encouragement is part of an evolving framework, pending the definition of the relevant procedures by the Guidelines pursuant to Article 64-quater of the CAD, which refers to Article 69 regarding the release of source code. Open source is supported by the Italian Digital Administration Code (CAD) articles 68 and 69 (and related guidelines), European regulations (``Artificial Intelligence Act (AI Act)`` <https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32024R1689>_, ``Cyber Resilience Act (CRA)`` <https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=OJ:L_202402847>_, ``Interoperable Europe Act`` <https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=OJ:L_202400903>_).
```

All the implementers, be these Wallet Providers, Credential Issuers or Relying Parties, owning the product code (from now on Open Source Project Owner) SHOULD follow industry best practices for open-source software, including proper documentation, version control, and community engagement. In particular:

    - **Transparency and Documentation**: Open Source Project Owners SHOULD produce clear documentation and contribution guidelines.
    - **Community Engagement**: Open Source Project Owners SHOULD foster active community involvement for development and support.

>     - **Version Control**: Open Source Project Owners MAY use systems like Git for managing code changes.

Reviewer 7: (nice) Probably we can mention the keyword "software version control".

Also, unsure if we should make this a bit more "MUST" :) Otherwise people will release ZIP archives with v1_final_really.zip ihih

Something like this?

> **Version Control**: Open Source Project Owners SHOULD use git as software version control and in any case MUST use a software version control to manage code changes and releases, to simplify forking, blaming, merging and collaboration in general.

Reviewer 8: Italian guidelines for reuse and open source say that you MUST use a version control system and you MUST allow anyone to register and open issues or send PRs (of course you decide what to accept).
Under which regulations are we working?

Author: ok aligned with MUST, having git only as a given example.

>     - **Version Control**: Open Source Project Owners MAY use systems like Git for managing code changes.

Author: ```suggestion
    - **Software Version Control**: Open Source Project Owners MUST use version control systems, such as Git, for managing code changes.
```

>     - **Software Version Control**: Open Source Project Owners MUST use version control systems, such as Git, for managing code changes.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    - **Software Version Control**: Open Source Project Owners SHOULD use version control systems, such as Git, for managing code changes.
```

>     - **Security Practices**: Open Source Project Owners MUST produce regular code audits and secure coding standards.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    - **Security Practices**: Open Source Project Owners SHOULD produce regular code audits and secure coding standards.
```

>     - **Licensing**: Open Source Project Owners MUST use appropriate open-source licenses (e.g., EUPL, MIT, Apache 2.0, GPL, AGPL).

Reviewer 7: Maybe we can add something like this, to exclude esoteric licenses like "GPL + COMMON CLAUSE":

> the license MUST be recognized as "free license" or "open source license" by the Free Software Foundation or the Open Source Initiative, without any added restrictions.

Reviewer 8: https://interoperable-europe.ec.europa.eu/collection/eupl/solution/licensing-assistant/find-and-compare-software-licenses

Actually EUPL (1.2) seems to be 1st choice for IEA

>     - **Licensing**: Open Source Project Owners MUST use appropriate open-source licenses (e.g., EUPL, MIT, Apache 2.0, GPL, AGPL).

Author: ```suggestion
    - **Licensing**: Open Source Project Owners MUST use appropriate open-source licenses, recognized as "free license" or "open source license" by the Free Software Foundation or the Open Source Initiative.
```

>     - **Responsible Security Disclosure**: Open Source Project Owners MUST configure responsible security disclosure procedures to handle the security issues in an appropriate way, mitigating any kind of threat derived by an unresponsible security issue disclosure. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    - **Responsible Security Disclosure**: Open Source Project Owners SHOULD configure responsible security disclosure procedures to handle the security issues in an appropriate way, mitigating any kind of threat derived by an unresponsible security issue disclosure. 
```

Wallet Provider Solutions 
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Wallet Solution Providers are required to release their source code, build system, and all other assets required to the reproducibility of the implementation in order to facilitate transparency, security auditing within the IT-Wallet ecosystem. The release of source code adheres to the following guidelines:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Wallet Solution Providers are encouraged to release their source code, build system, and all other assets required to the reproducibility of the implementation in order to facilitate transparency, security auditing within the IT-Wallet ecosystem. Where applicable, the release of source code SHOULD follow the specifications below:
```

> Wallet Provider Solutions 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Wallet Providers
```

> Wallet Solution Providers are encouraged to release their source code, build system, and all other assets required to the reproducibility of the implementation in order to facilitate transparency, security auditing within the IT-Wallet ecosystem. Where applicable, the release of source code SHOULD follow the specifications below:

Reviewer 6: check if the right wording is "Wallet Solution Providers" or "Wallet Provider"

Author: Done. We use Wallet provider only

> Wallet Solution Providers are encouraged to release their source code, build system, and all other assets required to the reproducibility of the implementation in order to facilitate transparency, security auditing within the IT-Wallet ecosystem. Where applicable, the release of source code SHOULD follow the specifications below:

Reviewer 6: when this document will be mandatory, re-consider the scope

Author: Moved tò https://github.com/italia/eid-wallet-it-docs/issues/646

- **European Regulations**: According to the Consolidated Regulation (EU) 2024/2979, Art 5a item 3, `the source code of the application software components of European Digital Identity Wallets shall be open-source licensed. Member States may provide that, for duly justified reasons, the source code of specific components other than those installed on user devices shall not be disclosed`.

Credential Issuers Solutions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Credential Issuers are required to release their source code if they are providers for public administrations or if they are public administrations themselves. The requirements include:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Credential Issuers are encouraged to release their source code under an open-source license, starting from the experimentation phase, in accordance with the principles set out in Article 69 of the CAD. The requirements include:
```

> - **European Regulations**: According to the Consolidated Regulation (EU) 2024/2979, Art 5a item 3, `the source code of the application software components of European Digital Identity Wallets shall be open-source licensed. Member States may provide that, for duly justified reasons, the source code of specific components other than those installed on user devices shall not be disclosed`.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- **European Regulations**: According to the Consolidated Regulation (EU) 910/2014, Art 5a item 3, `the source code of the application software components of European Digital Identity Wallets shall be open-source licensed. Member States may provide that, for duly justified reasons, the source code of specific components other than those installed on user devices shall not be disclosed`.
```

> Credential Issuers Solutions

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Credential Issuers
```

- **Public Administration Engagement**: Issuers working with public administrations MUST ensure their solutions are released with an open source license, in the way specified by the CAD art. 69 (and related guidelines).

> - **Catalog of Reuse**: Solutions created with or for public administration MUST be submitted to the public administration reuse catalog to promote widespread adoption and adaptation.

Author: ```suggestion
- **Catalog of Reuse**: Solutions created with or for public administration MUST be submitted to the public administration software reuse catalog to promote widespread adoption and adaptation.
```

> Credential Issuers are encouraged to release their source code under an open-source license, starting from the experimentation phase, in accordance with the principles set out in Article 69 of the CAD. The requirements include:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Credential Issuers are encouraged to release their source code under an open-source license, starting from the experimentation phase.
```

Relying Parties Solutions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Relying Parties are subject to the same conditions as Credential Issuers regarding the release of their source code.

> 

Reviewer: Visto che si applica già il 69 del CAD non pensiamo sia necessario questo dettaglio nelle specifiche tecniche, il dettaglio è necessario solo per il Wallet Provider in quanto obbligati dalle LLGG.

> Relying Parties are subject to the same conditions as Credential Issuers regarding the release of their source code.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Relying Parties are are encouraged to follow the same conditions as Credential Issuers regarding the release of their source code.
```

> - **Public Administration Engagement**: Issuers working with public administrations MUST ensure their solutions are released with an open source license, in the way specified by the CAD art. 69 (and related guidelines).

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
- **Public Administration Engagement**: Issuers working with public administrations SHOULD ensure their solutions are released with an open source license, in the way specified by the CAD art. 69 (and related guidelines).
```

> - **Public Administration Engagement**: Issuers working with public administrations SHOULD ensure their solutions are released with an open source license, in the way specified by the CAD art. 69 (and related guidelines).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
```

> - **Catalog of Reuse**: Solutions created with or for public administration MUST be submitted to the public administration software reuse catalog to promote widespread adoption and adaptation.

Author: ```suggestion
- **Catalog of Reuse**: Solutions created with or for public administration SHOULD be submitted to the public administration software reuse catalog to promote widespread adoption and adaptation.
```

> - **Catalog of Reuse**: Solutions created with or for public administration SHOULD be submitted to the public administration software reuse catalog to promote widespread adoption and adaptation.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
```

> Relying Parties Solutions

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Relying Parties
```

Responsible Disclosure
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> In the European context, the Cyber Resilience Act (CRA) mandates procedures for handling vulnerability reports and requires reporting actively exploited vulnerabilities to Computer Security Incident Response Teams (CSIRTs). The Directive on Security of Network and Information Systems Directive (EU) 2022/2555 (NIS2 <https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:32022L2555>_) also emphasizes vulnerability handling within cybersecurity risk management. Many member states have national responsible disclosure policies.

Author: ```suggestion
In the European context, the Cyber Resilience Act (CRA) mandates procedures for handling vulnerability reports and requires reporting actively exploited vulnerabilities to Computer Security Incident Response Teams (CSIRTs). The Directive on Security of Network and Information Systems Directive (EU) 2022/2555 (NIS2 <https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:32022L2555>_) also emphasizes vulnerability handling within cybersecurity risk management.
```

ISO/IEC 29147:2018 (<https://www.iso.org/standard/72311.html>_) provides guidelines for vulnerability disclosure processes. Industry best practices, often seen in bug bounty platforms, clear reporting, response times, safe harbor, and coordinated disclosure.

Security Best Practices for Releasing Source Code of Critical Components

> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Author: ```suggestion
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

> ISO/IEC 29147:2018 (<https://www.iso.org/standard/72311.html>_) provides guidelines for vulnerability disclosure processes. Industry best practices, often seen in bug bounty platforms, clear reporting, response times, safe harbor, and coordinated disclosure.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
ISO/IEC 29147:2018 (<https://www.iso.org/standard/72311.html>_) provides guidelines for vulnerability disclosure processes. Industry best practices includes bug bounty platforms, clear reporting, response times, safe harbor, and coordinated disclosure.
```

Author: Moved to a separate issue

> ISO/IEC 29147:2018 (<https://www.iso.org/standard/72311.html>_) provides guidelines for vulnerability disclosure processes. Industry best practices, often seen in bug bounty platforms, clear reporting, response times, safe harbor, and coordinated disclosure.

Reviewer 6: consider moving this part to an issue as the topic is very wide and needs more in-depth anlysis (and consider creating a separate document for responsible disclosure)

Author: Done

The EU Open Source Software Strategy encourages open sourcing with an implicit need for security. The CRA's focus on security by design and Software Bill of Materials (SBOMs <https://www.cisa.gov/sbom>_) requires secure development practices relevant to open source releases.

> The Open Worldwide Application Security Project (OWASP <https://owasp.org/>_) provides extensive secure coding guidelines and security patterns. The  SysAdmin, Audit, Network, and Security Institute (SANS <https://www.sans.org/>_) and the Italian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT <https://cert-agid.gov.it/>_) offer secure coding standards for various languages. Version control best practices include regular commits, detailed messages, code reviews, branch protection, and careful secret management. Employing static and dynamic code analysis, along with threat modeling, is crucial before release. Robust dependency management involves SBOMs, regular updates, vulnerability scanning, and version pinning. Secure build and release processes ensure software integrity. For open-source projects, engaging with the community and maintaining transparency about security practices are RECOMMENDED.

Author: ```suggestion
The Open Worldwide Application Security Project (OWASP <https://owasp.org/>_) provides extensive secure coding guidelines and security patterns. The  SysAdmin, Audit, Network, and Security Institute (SANS <https://www.sans.org/>_) and the Italian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT <https://cert-agid.gov.it/>_) offer secure coding standards for various languages. Version control best practices include regular commits, detailed messages, code reviews, branch protection, and careful secret management. Employing static and dynamic code analysis, along with threat modeling, is required before release. Robust dependency management involves SBOMs, regular updates, vulnerability scanning, and version pinning. Secure build and release processes ensure software integrity. For open-source projects, engaging with the community and maintaining transparency about security practices are RECOMMENDED.
```

> The Open Worldwide Application Security Project (OWASP <https://owasp.org/>_) provides extensive secure coding guidelines and security patterns. The  SysAdmin, Audit, Network, and Security Institute (SANS <https://www.sans.org/>_) and the Italian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT <https://cert-agid.gov.it/>_) offer secure coding standards for various languages. Version control best practices include regular commits, detailed messages, code reviews, branch protection, and careful secret management. Employing static and dynamic code analysis, along with threat modeling, is required before release. Robust dependency management involves SBOMs, regular updates, vulnerability scanning, and version pinning. Secure build and release processes ensure software integrity. For open-source projects, engaging with the community and maintaining transparency about security practices are RECOMMENDED.

Reviewer 6: consider moving external references to a separate section / removal of this section

Author: Done
